The President:
When I took office
eight months ago,
our nation was in the midst of
an economic crisis unlike any
we'd seen in generations.
While I was confident that
our economy would recover,
we knew that employment is often
the last thing to come back
after a recession.
Our task is to do everything we
possibly can to accelerate that process.
And we've certainly made
progress on this front since the
period last winter when we were losing an average of 700,000
jobs each month.
But yesterday's report on
September job losses was a
sobering reminder that progress
comes in fits and starts,
and that we will need to grind
out this recovery step by step.
That's why I'm working closely
with my economic team to explore
additional options to
promote job creation.
And I won't let up until those
who seek jobs can find them;
until businesses that seek
capital and credit can thrive;
and until all responsible
homeowners can stay in their homes.
It won't be easy.
It will require us to lay a new
foundation for our economy --
one that gives our workers the
skills and education they need
to compete; that invests in
renewable energy and the jobs of
the future; and that makes
health care affordable for
families and businesses -- particularly small businesses,
many of which have been overwhelmed by rising health care costs.
This is something I hear about
from entrepreneurs I meet --
people who've got a good
idea, and the expertise and
determination to build it
into a thriving business.
But many can't take that leap
because they can't afford to
lose the health insurance they
have at their current job.
I hear about it from small
business owners who want to grow
their companies and hire
more people, but they can't,
because they can barely afford
to insure the employees they have.
One small business owner wrote
to me that health care costs are
-- and I quote -- "stifling
my business growth."
He said that the money he
wanted to use for research and
development, and to
expand his operations,
has instead been "thrown
into the pockets of healthcare
insurance carriers."
These small businesses are
the mom and pop stores and
restaurants, beauty shops and
construction companies that
support families and
sustain communities.
They're the small
startups with big ideas,
hoping to be the next
Google, or Apple, or HP.
Altogether, they create
roughly half of all new jobs.
And right now, they are paying
up to 18% more for the very same
insurance plans as larger
businesses because they have
higher administrative costs
and less bargaining power.
Many have been forced to cut
benefits or drop coverage.
Some have shed jobs or
shut their doors entirely.
And recent studies show
that if we fail to act now,
employers will pay 6% more to
insure their employees next year
-- and more than twice as
much over the next decade.
Rising health care costs are
undermining our businesses,
exploding our deficits, and
costing our nation more jobs
with each passing month.
So we know that reforming our
health insurance system will be
a critical step in rebuilding
our economy so that our
entrepreneurs can pursue
the American Dream again,
and our small businesses can
grow and expand and create new
jobs again.
That's precisely what the reform legislation before Congress
right now will do.
Under these proposals, small
businesses will be able to
purchase health insurance
through an insurance exchange,
a marketplace where they
can compare the price,
quality and services of
a wide variety of plans,
many of which will provide
better coverage at lower cost
than the plans they have now.
95% of small businesses won't
be required to cover their
employees, but many that do will
receive a tax credit to help
them pay for it.
If a small business chooses
not to provide coverage,
its employees will receive tax
credits to help them purchase
health insurance on their own
through the insurance exchange.
And no matter how you
get your insurance,
insurance companies will no
longer be allowed to deny your
coverage because of a
pre-existing condition.
They won't be able to drop your
coverage if you get too sick,
or lose your job,
or change jobs.
And we'll limit the amount your
insurance company can force you
to pay out of your own pocket.
By now, the urgency of these
reforms is abundantly clear.
And after long hours of
thoughtful deliberation and
tough negotiation, the
Senate Finance Committee --
the final congressional
committee involved in shaping
health care legislation -- has finished the process of crafting
their reform proposal.
As we move forward
in the coming weeks,
I understand that members of
Congress from both parties will
want to engage in a vigorous
debate and contribute their own ideas.
And I welcome those
contributions.
I welcome any sincere attempts
to improve legislation before it
reaches my desk.
But what I will not accept
are attempts to stall,
or drag our feet.
I will not accept partisan
efforts to block reform at any cost.
Instead, I expect us to move
forward with a spirit of
civility, a
seriousness of purpose,
and a willingness to compromise
that characterizes our
democratic process
at its very best.
If we do that, I'm confident that we will pass reform this
year, and help ensure that our
entrepreneurs, our businesses,
and our economy can
thrive in the years ahead.
Thanks.